source/D0193R0.rst, before:

======================================
D0193R0 Where is Vectorization in C++‽
======================================

:Author: JF Bastien
:Contact: jfb@google.com
:Date: 2016-01-??
:URL: https://github.com/jfbastien/papers/blob/master/source/D0193R0.rst

The C++ Standards Committee's Concurrency and Parallelism sub-group (WG21/SG1)
has considered multiple approaches to user-aided vector programming and
Single-Instruction Multiple-Data (SIMD) computations. The Committee's Game
Development & Low Latency sub-group (WG21/SG14) has expressed interest in
participating in this design as well. This paper documents the state of SG1's
exploration with the goal of moving the Committee towards a Technical
Specification in the near future.

This paper doesn't deal with auto-vectorization in any form.

---------------
Design Approach
---------------

SG1 has prefered library-only solutions for user-aided vector programming. These
changes often integrate into the language more cleanly because they don't
interact with the rest of the language and don't introduce onerous
single-purpose syntax. This also allows the library implementation to use
vendor-specific extensions in a manner that is seamless to the developer, giving
leeway to implementations and allowing them to change their extensions over time
without needing to standardize a particular implementation approach. When
*implementors* peek under the hood the solution isn't library-only, but the
Standard presents C++ *users* with what appears as a library-only solution.

A similar design approach was taken for the ``<atomic>`` library (as was the
original motivation for a library-only design for coroutines). In the
``<atomic>`` case, interoperability with C was a strong design consideration,
allowing ``std::atomic`` to be implemented in terms of ``_Atomic`` or vice
versa, and allowing a program to use both correctly. A library approach allowed
the Standard to reason in terms of objects and their lifetime instead of C's
more error-prone per-access specification where each access has to be consistent
lest it cause undefined behavior. It also allows implementations to specify
storage for ``std::atomic<T>`` which differs from ``T``'s storage, and which may
have a different ABI. These library types further enable developers to use
common generic programming patterns. We've found that some generic programming
facilities were missing, such as `constexpr atomic<T>::is_always_lock_free`_,
and the library's design has made their addition simple.

.. _`constexpr atomic<T>::is_always_lock_free`: http://wg21.link/n4509

The Committee in general has a strong leaning towards proposals which
standardize existing practice. Implementation experience and usage experience
are key. For vector programming, SG1 wants a Technical Specification which has
at least one solid implementation, and would rather standardize something with
multiple implementations and sustained usage. In the case of vector programming,
platform portability and vendor buy-in matters much more than for most other C++
language or library features: the features are intended to work well on a
variety of architectures with different fixed-width SIMD widths, with
variable-width capabilities, and to degrade gracefully to scalar operation on
architectures without vector capabilities.

The solution should work well for developers who target:

1. Multiple different ISAs with the same code base.
2. Multiple architectural implementations of the same ISA, sometimes supporting
   wider vectors in newer revisions.
3. A single architectural implementation (such as HPC or consoles) to obtain
   better performance by using their compiler's tuning flags such as ``-march``.
4. Separate compilation of different source files, with the ability to provide
   vector code in libraries.

Vector programming requiring specific code-generation techniques such as
Just-in-Time code generation would be a very unusual change for
C++. Ahead-of-Time compilation is also frequently used, which doesn't preclude
implementations from using other approaches if they desire.

Some in the committee believe that the amount of code generated by a compiler
should not explode when new features are used, whereas others find the size
trade-off acceptable. Requiring functions to be compiled multiple times is a
no-go for some developers, especially if other language or library features
interact in a combinatorial manner. One design point SG1 has considered is
giving the developer control over the code size tradeoffs, as is possible with
OpenMP.

Existing practice takes two approaches to user-aided vector programming:

1. High-level library focusing on APIs and their operations on data ranges.
2. Low-level vector types and operations on ``N`` scalars.

The former is typically easy to use while sometimes achieving optimal
speedups. The later is often harder to use but grants developers more control,
can provide significant speedups, and is usable to build some higher-level
libraries. SG1 is comfortable moving forward with one Technical Specification in
each category.

-----------------
Open Design Areas
-----------------

Vectorization is inherently re-association and therefore interacts with
floating-point results. Beyond re-association, the solutions which SG1 has
explored have not exposed architectural differences in the result's precision,
yet some applications benefit from significant speedups when some precision is
abandoned. It is usually up to the developer to figure out whether their
application remains correct with the loss of precision. It is unclear whether
SG1 is comfortable exploring such vector programming opportunities at this point
in time. For example:

* Image crossfade can be accelerated without loss of precision by using some
  architecture-specific instructions, or by dropping the least-significant bits
  when blending.
* Some architectures provide vector floating-point reciprocal and reciprocal
  square root approximation instructions, whereas in other architectures fast
  floating-point inverse square root can be obtained using integer multiply by a
  constant.
* Some architectures provide vectorized 16-bit floating-point, in some cases
  simply as a storage type whereas in other cases most arithmetic is supported
  on half-precision floating-point.
* Some architecture support Fused-Multiply-Add which performs one less rounding
  that the unfused equivalent, and is sometimes faster or less power-demanding
  than the unfused equivalent. Floating-point contraction is meant to address
  this, but the support for it isn't generally useful.

A core optimization which hasn't directly been addressed directly by current
vector programming proposals is how to restructure data structures and
algorithms to better fit the current architecture's SIMD width and memory
hierarchy. C++ data structures have a fixed layout at a very stage in the
compiler's pipeline, yet in many cases it is beneficial to change
Array-of-Structures to Structures-of-Arrays. Low-level vector types as well as
proposed reflection features (c.f. WG21/SG7) can be used to synthesize optimal
data structures. This requires each programmer to express data structure layout
transformations which are suitable to their algorithms and target architectures.

-------------
Latest Papers
-------------

The following papers are the latest ones being considered by SG1 with respect to
vector programming. Other papers are obsolete, have been abandoned, or haven't
been presented to SG1 recently.

Some of the following papers are explored in more details in the next sections.

* The Parallelism TS has a similar API as the STL's ``<algorithm>``
  header. These algorithms are composable by the developer, who provides
  iterators to the data and, in some cases, function objects.

  - `DTS Ballot Document`_.
  - `Should be Standardized`_.
  - `Template Library for Index-Based Loops`_.
  - `Vector and wavefront policies`_.
  - `Light-Weight Execution Agents`_ discusses forward progress guarantees, with
    special attention to the Parralelism TS.

* The SIMD Types proposal exposes types which are fixed-width as well as
  ``typedef`` for wider vectors as appropriate for the target architecture.

  - `The Vector Type & Operations`_.
  - `The Mask Type & Write-Masking`_.
  - `ABI Considerations`_.
  - `Example: Matrix Multiplication`_.
  - `A Proposal to add Single Instruction Multiple Data Computation to the
    Standard Library`_ pre-dates the The Vector Type & Operations proposal and
    has similar API principles with different API choices and naming. The
    authors are discussing collaboration since The Vector Type & Operations
    proposal has received strong support from SG1.

* `Dynamic memory allocation for over-aligned data`_ allows allocating aligned
  data.

 .. _`DTS Ballot Document`: http://wg21.link/N4354
 .. _`Should be Standardized`: http://wg21.link/p0024r0
 .. _`Template Library for Index-Based Loops`: http://wg21.link/p0075r0
 .. _`Vector and wavefront policies`: http://wg21.link/p0076r0
 .. _`Light-Weight Execution Agents`: http://wg21.link/p0072r0
 .. _`The Vector Type & Operations`: http://wg21.link/n4184
 .. _`The Mask Type & Write-Masking`: http://wg21.link/n4185
 .. _`ABI Considerations`: http://wg21.link/n4395
 .. _`Example: Matrix Multiplication`: http://wg21.link/n4454
 .. _`A Proposal to add Single Instruction Multiple Data Computation to the Standard Library`: http://wg21.link/n3571
 .. _`Dynamic memory allocation for over-aligned data`: http://wg21.link/p0035r0


----------------------
Parallelism TS Details
----------------------

Of note in the Parallelism TS is the ``par_vec`` execution policy from section
2.6 [parallel.execpol.vec]:

  The class ``class parallel_vector_execution_policy`` is an execution policy
  type used as a unique type to disambiguate parallel algorithm overloading and
  indicate that a parallel algorithm's execution may be vectorized and
  parallelized.

  This execution policy is defined as follows in section 4.1.2
  [parallel.alg.general.exec]:

  The invocations of element access functions in parallel algorithms invoked
  with an execution policy of type ``parallel_vector_execution_policy`` are
  permitted to execute in an unordered fashion in unspecified threads, and
  unsequenced with respect to one another within each thread. [ *Note:* This
  means that multiple function object invocations may be interleaved on a single
  thread. — *end note* ]

  [ *Note:* This overrides the usual guarantee from the C++ standard, Section
  1.9 [intro.execution] that function executions do not interleave with one
  another. — *end note* ]

  Since ``parallel_vector_execution_policy`` allows the execution of element
  access functions to be interleaved on a single thread, synchronization,
  including the use of mutexes, risks deadlock. Thus the synchronization with
  ``parallel_vector_execution_policy`` is restricted as follows:

  A standard library function is *vectorization-unsafe* if it is specified to
  synchronize with another function invocation, or another function invocation
  is specified to synchronize with it, and if it is not a memory allocation or
  deallocation function. Vectorization-unsafe standard library functions may not
  be invoked by user code called from ``parallel_vector_execution_policy``
  algorithms.

  [ *Note:* Implementations must ensure that internal synchronization inside
  standard library routines does not induce deadlock. — *end note* ]

----------------------------------------------
Template Library for Index-Based Loops Details
----------------------------------------------

The proposal adds the following to the Parallelism TS:

* ``for_loop`` and ``for_loop_strided``.
* ``reduction``, ``reduction_plus``, ``reduction_mutiplies``, …
* ``induction``.

-------------------------------------
Vector and wavefront policies Details
-------------------------------------

The proposal adds two new execution policies to the Parallelism TS:

* ``unseq_execution_policy``.
* ``vec_execution_policy``.

This paper is contentious in SG1 because examples such as the following have
``par_vec`` data races:

.. code:: c++

  for_loop(vec, 0, n, [&](int i) {
     y[i] += y[i+1];
  });

In the implicit wavefront policy, this will work as expected: The load is
sequenced before the store, and the loaded location is only overwritten by a
later iteration. Operations that both appear earlier in the loop body (in the
sequenced before sense) and in an earlier (or same) iteration than in another
operation remain ordered in this model. This is the classic model followed by
many existing vectorizing compilers.

In the explicit wavefront model, this requires a new kind of ordering barrier to
explicitly ensure this ordering.

Three alternatives were discussed by a few SG1 members, outside of a full SG1
meeting. The first alternative is prefered by the small group at this point in
time.

1. The implicit model continues to make some slightly uncomfortable, but there
   is agreement that we should nonetheless proceed with it. It is clearly the
   center of existing practice. And the negatives seem to be more along the
   lines of vague discomfort rather than precisely definable objections.

   The fundamental issue with this model is that it introduces a context in
   which certain otherwise safe compile transformations can no longer be applied
   by a compiler before the code is vectorized. Before the code is vectorized,
   the sequenced-before relation must, in the general case, be preserved. The
   compiler is no longer allowed to reorder ordinary assignments touching
   different memory locations. In other contexts such restrictions only arise in
   the presence of synchronization or volatile operations. For a compiler that
   immediately vectorizes before performing other transformations, this is not
   an issue. The current belief is that that this does commonly impact compiler
   structure.

   This transformation restriction of course also applies to the user:
   reordering independent operations in a vector context affects semantics and
   may not be correct. But users should expect that. In theory it applies to
   libraries called from a vector context as well. But in practice the calling
   code will either not be sensitive to such reordering, or the library routines
   will have been written with the explicit expectation of being used in a
   vector context.

2. A narrow majority of SG1 previously favored the explicit model to largely
   avoid this issue. By requiring explicit barriers of some sort, the implicit
   compiler restrictions disappear. But the problem with this is pointed out by
   the above example: there is no natural place to just put a barrier. In fact
   it would have to order a textually later operation before an earlier one. One
   would have to break the loop body up into multiple statements. This was
   previously pointed out, and SG1 was mostly convinced that this is a serious
   practical issue, at least for those already familiar with the implicit model.

3. There was brief thinking about alternative non-barrier-like syntax to address
   the problems with (2). But there wasn't much enthusiasm for trying to invent
   something new at this stage.

------------------------------------
The Vector Type & Operations Details
------------------------------------

This paper describes a template class for portable SIMD Vector types. The class
is portable because its size depends on the target system and only operations
that are independent of the SIMD register size are part of the interface.

The ``Vector<T>`` type only has the vector element type ``T`` as a parameter. It
has ``constexpr`` members ``MemoryAlignment`` and ``Size``.

The following APIs are supported:

* ``load`` and ``store`` based on a pointer to the scalar element type.

  - With optional mask.
  - Some are based on a pointer to a different scalar type, leading to
    conversion.
  - Optional flags specify alignment, temporality, and prefetching.

* Unary ``+`` and ``-``.
* Binary arithmetic, comparison, bitwise, and shift.
* Subscripting.
* Gather and scatter.

---------------
Acknowledgement
---------------

Thanks to Hans Boehm, Chandler Carruth, Joel Falcou, Michael Wong, and Robert
Geva for their review of the pre-publication paper.

Thanks to the many vector programming paper authors and SG1 for working
tirelessly on such a complex topic for years.

Commit message:

Add Hans as co-author
He wrote most of the wavefront details section but hadn't gotten back to me on whether he wanted to be a co-author. Saw him today, he says yes.

source/D0193R0.rst, after:

======================================
D0193R0 Where is Vectorization in C++‽
======================================

:Author: JF Bastien
:Contact: jfb@google.com
:Author: Hans Boehm
:Contact: hboehm@google.com
:Date: 2016-01-21
:URL: https://github.com/jfbastien/papers/blob/master/source/D0193R0.rst

The C++ Standards Committee's Concurrency and Parallelism sub-group (WG21/SG1)
has considered multiple approaches to user-aided vector programming and
Single-Instruction Multiple-Data (SIMD) computations. The Committee's Game
Development & Low Latency sub-group (WG21/SG14) has expressed interest in
participating in this design as well. This paper documents the state of SG1's
exploration with the goal of moving the Committee towards a Technical
Specification in the near future.

This paper doesn't deal with auto-vectorization in any form.

---------------
Design Approach
---------------

SG1 has prefered library-only solutions for user-aided vector programming. These
changes often integrate into the language more cleanly because they don't
interact with the rest of the language and don't introduce onerous
single-purpose syntax. This also allows the library implementation to use
vendor-specific extensions in a manner that is seamless to the developer, giving
leeway to implementations and allowing them to change their extensions over time
without needing to standardize a particular implementation approach. When
*implementors* peek under the hood the solution isn't library-only, but the
Standard presents C++ *users* with what appears as a library-only solution.

A similar design approach was taken for the ``<atomic>`` library (as was the
original motivation for a library-only design for coroutines). In the
``<atomic>`` case, interoperability with C was a strong design consideration,
allowing ``std::atomic`` to be implemented in terms of ``_Atomic`` or vice
versa, and allowing a program to use both correctly. A library approach allowed
the Standard to reason in terms of objects and their lifetime instead of C's
more error-prone per-access specification where each access has to be consistent
lest it cause undefined behavior. It also allows implementations to specify
storage for ``std::atomic<T>`` which differs from ``T``'s storage, and which may
have a different ABI. These library types further enable developers to use
common generic programming patterns. We've found that some generic programming
facilities were missing, such as `constexpr atomic<T>::is_always_lock_free`_,
and the library's design has made their addition simple.

.. _`constexpr atomic<T>::is_always_lock_free`: http://wg21.link/n4509

The Committee in general has a strong leaning towards proposals which
standardize existing practice. Implementation experience and usage experience
are key. For vector programming, SG1 wants a Technical Specification which has
at least one solid implementation, and would rather standardize something with
multiple implementations and sustained usage. In the case of vector programming,
platform portability and vendor buy-in matters much more than for most other C++
language or library features: the features are intended to work well on a
variety of architectures with different fixed-width SIMD widths, with
variable-width capabilities, and to degrade gracefully to scalar operation on
architectures without vector capabilities.

The solution should work well for developers who target:

1. Multiple different ISAs with the same code base.
2. Multiple architectural implementations of the same ISA, sometimes supporting
   wider vectors in newer revisions.
3. A single architectural implementation (such as HPC or consoles) to obtain
   better performance by using their compiler's tuning flags such as ``-march``.
4. Separate compilation of different source files, with the ability to provide
   vector code in libraries.

Vector programming requiring specific code-generation techniques such as
Just-in-Time code generation would be a very unusual change for
C++. Ahead-of-Time compilation is also frequently used, which doesn't preclude
implementations from using other approaches if they desire.

Some in the committee believe that the amount of code generated by a compiler
should not explode when new features are used, whereas others find the size
trade-off acceptable. Requiring functions to be compiled multiple times is a
no-go for some developers, especially if other language or library features
interact in a combinatorial manner. One design point SG1 has considered is
giving the developer control over the code size tradeoffs, as is possible with
OpenMP.

Existing practice takes two approaches to user-aided vector programming:

1. High-level library focusing on APIs and their operations on data ranges.
2. Low-level vector types and operations on ``N`` scalars.

The former is typically easy to use while sometimes achieving optimal
speedups. The later is often harder to use but grants developers more control,
can provide significant speedups, and is usable to build some higher-level
libraries. SG1 is comfortable moving forward with one Technical Specification in
each category.

-----------------
Open Design Areas
-----------------

Vectorization is inherently re-association and therefore interacts with
floating-point results. Beyond re-association, the solutions which SG1 has
explored have not exposed architectural differences in the result's precision,
yet some applications benefit from significant speedups when some precision is
abandoned. It is usually up to the developer to figure out whether their
application remains correct with the loss of precision. It is unclear whether
SG1 is comfortable exploring such vector programming opportunities at this point
in time. For example:

* Image crossfade can be accelerated without loss of precision by using some
  architecture-specific instructions, or by dropping the least-significant bits
  when blending.
* Some architectures provide vector floating-point reciprocal and reciprocal
  square root approximation instructions, whereas in other architectures fast
  floating-point inverse square root can be obtained using integer multiply by a
  constant.
* Some architectures provide vectorized 16-bit floating-point, in some cases
  simply as a storage type whereas in other cases most arithmetic is supported
  on half-precision floating-point.
* Some architecture support Fused-Multiply-Add which performs one less rounding
  that the unfused equivalent, and is sometimes faster or less power-demanding
  than the unfused equivalent. Floating-point contraction is meant to address
  this, but the support for it isn't generally useful.

A core optimization which hasn't directly been addressed directly by current
vector programming proposals is how to restructure data structures and
algorithms to better fit the current architecture's SIMD width and memory
hierarchy. C++ data structures have a fixed layout at a very stage in the
compiler's pipeline, yet in many cases it is beneficial to change
Array-of-Structures to Structures-of-Arrays. Low-level vector types as well as
proposed reflection features (c.f. WG21/SG7) can be used to synthesize optimal
data structures. This requires each programmer to express data structure layout
transformations which are suitable to their algorithms and target architectures.

-------------
Latest Papers
-------------

The following papers are the latest ones being considered by SG1 with respect to
vector programming. Other papers are obsolete, have been abandoned, or haven't
been presented to SG1 recently.

Some of the following papers are explored in more details in the next sections.

* The Parallelism TS has a similar API as the STL's ``<algorithm>``
  header. These algorithms are composable by the developer, who provides
  iterators to the data and, in some cases, function objects.

  - `DTS Ballot Document`_.
  - `Should be Standardized`_.
  - `Template Library for Index-Based Loops`_.
  - `Vector and wavefront policies`_.
  - `Light-Weight Execution Agents`_ discusses forward progress guarantees, with
    special attention to the Parralelism TS.

* The SIMD Types proposal exposes types which are fixed-width as well as
  ``typedef`` for wider vectors as appropriate for the target architecture.

  - `The Vector Type & Operations`_.
  - `The Mask Type & Write-Masking`_.
  - `ABI Considerations`_.
  - `Example: Matrix Multiplication`_.
  - `A Proposal to add Single Instruction Multiple Data Computation to the
    Standard Library`_ pre-dates the The Vector Type & Operations proposal and
    has similar API principles with different API choices and naming. The
    authors are discussing collaboration since The Vector Type & Operations
    proposal has received strong support from SG1.

* `Dynamic memory allocation for over-aligned data`_ allows allocating aligned
  data.

 .. _`DTS Ballot Document`: http://wg21.link/N4354
 .. _`Should be Standardized`: http://wg21.link/p0024r0
 .. _`Template Library for Index-Based Loops`: http://wg21.link/p0075r0
 .. _`Vector and wavefront policies`: http://wg21.link/p0076r0
 .. _`Light-Weight Execution Agents`: http://wg21.link/p0072r0
 .. _`The Vector Type & Operations`: http://wg21.link/n4184
 .. _`The Mask Type & Write-Masking`: http://wg21.link/n4185
 .. _`ABI Considerations`: http://wg21.link/n4395
 .. _`Example: Matrix Multiplication`: http://wg21.link/n4454
 .. _`A Proposal to add Single Instruction Multiple Data Computation to the Standard Library`: http://wg21.link/n3571
 .. _`Dynamic memory allocation for over-aligned data`: http://wg21.link/p0035r0


----------------------
Parallelism TS Details
----------------------

Of note in the Parallelism TS is the ``par_vec`` execution policy from section
2.6 [parallel.execpol.vec]:

  The class ``class parallel_vector_execution_policy`` is an execution policy
  type used as a unique type to disambiguate parallel algorithm overloading and
  indicate that a parallel algorithm's execution may be vectorized and
  parallelized.

  This execution policy is defined as follows in section 4.1.2
  [parallel.alg.general.exec]:

  The invocations of element access functions in parallel algorithms invoked
  with an execution policy of type ``parallel_vector_execution_policy`` are
  permitted to execute in an unordered fashion in unspecified threads, and
  unsequenced with respect to one another within each thread. [ *Note:* This
  means that multiple function object invocations may be interleaved on a single
  thread. — *end note* ]

  [ *Note:* This overrides the usual guarantee from the C++ standard, Section
  1.9 [intro.execution] that function executions do not interleave with one
  another. — *end note* ]

  Since ``parallel_vector_execution_policy`` allows the execution of element
  access functions to be interleaved on a single thread, synchronization,
  including the use of mutexes, risks deadlock. Thus the synchronization with
  ``parallel_vector_execution_policy`` is restricted as follows:

  A standard library function is *vectorization-unsafe* if it is specified to
  synchronize with another function invocation, or another function invocation
  is specified to synchronize with it, and if it is not a memory allocation or
  deallocation function. Vectorization-unsafe standard library functions may not
  be invoked by user code called from ``parallel_vector_execution_policy``
  algorithms.

  [ *Note:* Implementations must ensure that internal synchronization inside
  standard library routines does not induce deadlock. — *end note* ]

----------------------------------------------
Template Library for Index-Based Loops Details
----------------------------------------------

The proposal adds the following to the Parallelism TS:

* ``for_loop`` and ``for_loop_strided``.
* ``reduction``, ``reduction_plus``, ``reduction_mutiplies``, …
* ``induction``.

-------------------------------------
Vector and wavefront policies Details
-------------------------------------

The proposal adds two new execution policies to the Parallelism TS:

* ``unseq_execution_policy``.
* ``vec_execution_policy``.

This paper is contentious in SG1 because examples such as the following have
``par_vec`` data races:

.. code:: c++

  for_loop(vec, 0, n, [&](int i) {
     y[i] += y[i+1];
  });

In the implicit wavefront policy, this will work as expected: The load is
sequenced before the store, and the loaded location is only overwritten by a
later iteration. Operations that both appear earlier in the loop body (in the
sequenced before sense) and in an earlier (or same) iteration than in another
operation remain ordered in this model. This is the classic model followed by
many existing vectorizing compilers.

In the explicit wavefront model, this requires a new kind of ordering barrier to
explicitly ensure this ordering.

Three alternatives were discussed by a few SG1 members, outside of a full SG1
meeting. The first alternative is prefered by the small group at this point in
time.

1. The implicit model continues to make some slightly uncomfortable, but there
   is agreement that we should nonetheless proceed with it. It is clearly the
   center of existing practice. And the negatives seem to be more along the
   lines of vague discomfort rather than precisely definable objections.

   The fundamental issue with this model is that it introduces a context in
   which certain otherwise safe compile transformations can no longer be applied
   by a compiler before the code is vectorized. Before the code is vectorized,
   the sequenced-before relation must, in the general case, be preserved. The
   compiler is no longer allowed to reorder ordinary assignments touching
   different memory locations. In other contexts such restrictions only arise in
   the presence of synchronization or volatile operations. For a compiler that
   immediately vectorizes before performing other transformations, this is not
   an issue. The current belief is that that this does commonly impact compiler
   structure.

   This transformation restriction of course also applies to the user:
   reordering independent operations in a vector context affects semantics and
   may not be correct. But users should expect that. In theory it applies to
   libraries called from a vector context as well. But in practice the calling
   code will either not be sensitive to such reordering, or the library routines
   will have been written with the explicit expectation of being used in a
   vector context.

2. A narrow majority of SG1 previously favored the explicit model to largely
   avoid this issue. By requiring explicit barriers of some sort, the implicit
   compiler restrictions disappear. But the problem with this is pointed out by
   the above example: there is no natural place to just put a barrier. In fact
   it would have to order a textually later operation before an earlier one. One
   would have to break the loop body up into multiple statements. This was
   previously pointed out, and SG1 was mostly convinced that this is a serious
   practical issue, at least for those already familiar with the implicit model.

3. There was brief thinking about alternative non-barrier-like syntax to address
   the problems with (2). But there wasn't much enthusiasm for trying to invent
   something new at this stage.

------------------------------------
The Vector Type & Operations Details
------------------------------------

This paper describes a template class for portable SIMD Vector types. The class
is portable because its size depends on the target system and only operations
that are independent of the SIMD register size are part of the interface.

The ``Vector<T>`` type only has the vector element type ``T`` as a parameter. It
has ``constexpr`` members ``MemoryAlignment`` and ``Size``.

The following APIs are supported:

* ``load`` and ``store`` based on a pointer to the scalar element type.

  - With optional mask.
  - Some are based on a pointer to a different scalar type, leading to
    conversion.
  - Optional flags specify alignment, temporality, and prefetching.

* Unary ``+`` and ``-``.
* Binary arithmetic, comparison, bitwise, and shift.
* Subscripting.
* Gather and scatter.

---------------
Acknowledgement
---------------

Thanks to Chandler Carruth, Joel Falcou, Michael Wong, and Robert Geva for their
review of the pre-publication paper.

Thanks to the many vector programming paper authors and SG1 for working
tirelessly on such a complex topic for years.
