=============================================
D4269 No Sane Compiler Would Optimize Atomics
=============================================

:Author: JF Bastien
:Contact: jfb@google.com
:Date: 2015-03-30
:Revision: 5

--------
Abstract
--------

False.

Compilers do optimize atomics, memory accesses around atomics, and utilize
architecture-specific knowledge. This paper illustrates a few such
optimizations, and discusses their implications.

--------------------
Sample Optimizations
--------------------

We list optimizations that are either implemented in LLVM, or will be readily
implemented.

Optimizations on Atomics
========================

Atomics themselves can be optimized. A non-contentious example is constant
propagation into atomics without other intervening atomics:

.. code::

  void inc(std::atomic<int> *y) {
    *y += 1;
  }

  std::atomic<int> x;
  void two() {
    inc(&x);
    inc(&x);
  }

Becomes:

.. code::

  std::atomic<int> x;
  void two() {
    x += 2;
  }

This leads to further optimizations such as using the locked ``inc``/``dec``
instructions instead of locked ``add``/``sub`` when adding/subtracting ``1`` to
an atomic on x86:

.. code::

  std::atomic<int> x, y;
  void inc(int val) {
    x += 1;
    y += val;
  }

Becomes:

.. code::

  _Z3inci:
    lock incl x(%rip)
    lock addl %edi, y(%rip)
    retq

In a similar vein, some opportunities for strength reduction can be exposed
through inlining and then optimized, such as the following trivial example:

.. code::

  template<typename T>
  bool silly(std::atomic<T> *x, T expected, T desired) {
    x->compare_exchange_strong(expected, desired);
    return expected == desired;
  }

Becomes:

.. code::

  template<typename T>
  bool silly(std::atomic<T> *x, T expected, T desired) {
    return x->compare_exchange_strong(expected, desired);
  }

The following works for any memory order but ``release`` and ``acq_rel``:

.. code::

  template<typename T>
  bool optme(std::atomic<T> *x, T desired) {
    T expected = desired;
    return x->compare_exchange_strong(expected, desired);
  }

Becomes:

.. code::

  template<typename T>
  bool optme(std::atomic<T> *x, T desired) {
    return y->load(desired) == desired;
  }

Similarly, while keeping the resulting memory order stronger or equal to the
individual ones, the following can occur:

.. code::

  template<typename T>
  T optmetoo(std::atomic<T> *x, T y) {
    T z = x->load();
    x->store(y);
    return z;
  }

Becomes:

.. code::

  template<typename T>
  T optmetoo(std::atomic<T> *x, T y) {
    return x->exchange(y);
  }

This may not always pay off! Weaker memory models may be better off having the
laod and store separated.

Other simple optimizations can also occur because of inlining and constant
propagation such as turning ``atomic<T>::fetch_and(~(T)0)`` into
``atomic<T>::load()``. The same applies for ``fetch_or(0)`` and
``fetch_xor(0)``, as well as ``fetch_and(0)`` becoming ``store(0)``.

As a slightly different example, the value for ``std::is_lock_free`` can be
determined at compile time for some architectures, but for others the compiler
can't know the value for all sub-architectures and must return ``false``. The
compiler may be given a specific sub-architecture flag to work around this
(restricting which machines the code will execute correctly on) or must defer to
feature detection followed by patching when the program is loaded. This is the
case, for example, for x86's ``LOCK CMPXCHG16B`` instruction which is used to
implement lock-free 16-byte operations.

These optimizations aren't traditionally performed when using inline assembly
and showcases the strengths of hoisting abstractions to the language level.

The reader for seqlock_ bounds ticket acquisition and release with a load and a
fence. This lets the data reads get reordered in-between ticket acquire/release
by using ``relaxed`` memory ordering for data. The algorithm retries if the
ticket changed or data was being modified by the writer:

.. _seqlock: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seqlock

.. code::

  std::tuple<T, T> reader() {
    T d1, d2;
    unsigned seq0, seq1;
    do {
      seq0 = seq.load(std::memory_order_acquire);
      d1 = data1.load(std::memory_order_relaxed);
      d2 = data2.load(std::memory_order_relaxed);
      std::atomic_thread_fence(std::memory_order_acquire)
      seq1 = seq.load(std::memory_order_relaxed);
    } while (seq0 != seq1 || seq0 & 1);
    return {d1, d2};
  }
  
  void writer(T d1, T d2) {
    unsigned seq0 = seq.load(std::memory_order_relaxed);
    seq.store(seq0 + 1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    data1.store(d1, std::memory_order_release);
    data2.store(d2, std::memory_order_release);
    seq.store(seq0 + 2, std::memory_order_release);
  }

The last ticket load effectively act as a ``release`` load, which doesn't exist
in the current memory model but would better express the intent of the code
while allowing subsequent operations to be moved into the critical section if
profitable. Hans Boehm suggests_ using a ``release`` fetch-add of zero, and
shows that on x86 the code can be transformed as follows:

.. _suggests: http://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/2012/HPL-2012-68.pdf

.. code::

  int d1, d2;
  unsigned seq0, seq1;
  do {
    seq0 = seq.load(std::memory_order_acquire);
    d1 = data1.load(std::memory_order_relaxed);
    d2 = data2.load(std::memory_order_relaxed);
    seq1 = seq.fetch_add(0, std::memory_order_release);
  } while (seq0 != seq1 || seq0 & 1);

Becomes:

.. code::

  .LBB0_1:
        movl    seq(%rip), %esi
        movl    data1(%rip), %ecx
        movl    data2(%rip), %eax
        mfence
        movl    seq(%rip), %edi
        movl    %esi, %edx
        andl    $1, %edx
        cmpl    %edi, %esi
        jne     .LBB0_1
        testl   %edx, %edx
        jne     .LBB0_1

This reduces contention by replacing an instruction requiring exclusive cache
line access. This optimization is currently only known to be correct on x86, is
probably correct for other architectures, and is `currently implemented in
LLVM`_.

.. _`currently implemented in LLVM`: http://reviews.llvm.org/D5091

Similar to the above ``release`` fetch-add of zero serving as a ``release``
load, one could also use an ``acquire`` exchange when an ``acquire`` store is
desired.

Traditional compiler optimizations, such as dead store elimination, can be
performed on atomic operations, even sequentially consistent ones. Optimizers
have to be careful to avoid doing so across synchronization points because
another executor can observe or modify memory, which means that the traditional
optimizations have to consider more intervening instructions than they usually
would when considering optimizations to atomic operations. In the case of dead
store elimination it isn't sufficient to prove that an atomic store
post-dominates and aliases another to eliminate the other store.

A trickier example is fusion of ``relaxed`` atomic operations, even when
interleaved:

.. code::

  std::atomic<int> x, y;
  void relaxed() {
    x.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    y.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    x.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    y.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
  }

Becomes:

.. code::

  std::atomic<int> x, y;
  void relaxed() {
    x.fetch_add(2, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    y.fetch_add(2, std::memory_order_relaxed);
  }

We aren't aware of compilers performing this optimization yet, but `it is being
discussed`_. ``std::atomic_signal_fence`` could be used to prevent this
reordering and fusion, or one could use a stronger memory ordering for the
operations.

.. _`it is being discussed`: http://llvm.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=16477

A compiler can tag all functions on whether they have atomic instructions or
not, and optimize around call sites accordingly. This could even be done for all
virtual overrides when we can enumerate them, and can be used to carve out
different `inteference-free regions`_.

.. _`inteference-free regions`: http://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/2011/HPL-2011-57.pdf

Fences are generated as a consequence of ``std::atomic_thread_fence`` as well
as, on some architectures, atomic operations. Fences tend to be expensive, and
removing redundant ones as well as positioning them optimally leads to great
performance gains, while keeping the code correct and simple. This is `currently
under review in LLVM`_.

.. _`currently under review in LLVM`: http://reviews.llvm.org/D5758

Not all compiler optimizations are valid on atomics, this topic is still under
`active research`_.

.. _`active research`: http://www.di.ens.fr/~zappa/readings/c11comp.pdf

Optimizations Around Atomics
============================

Compilers can optimize non-atomic memory accesses before and after atomic
accesses. A somewhat surprising example is that the following code can be (`and
is`_!) transformed as shown.

.. _`and is`: http://reviews.llvm.org/D4845

.. TODO: Make sure this is actually valid.

.. code::

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int dso() {
    x = 0;
    int z = y.load(std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

Becomes:

.. code::

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int dso() {
    // Dead store eliminated.
    int z = y.load(std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

The following code, with a different store/load ordering and using
``release``/``acquire`` memory ordering, can also be transformed as shown (but
currently isn't).

.. code::

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int rlo() {
    x = 0;
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_release);
    int z = y.load(std::memory_order_acquire);
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

Becomes:

.. code::

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int rlo() {
    // Dead store eliminated.
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_release);
    // Redundant load eliminated.
    x = 1;
    return 0; // Stored value propagated here.
  }

Whereas the following code must (and does!) remain the same:

.. code::

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int no() {
    x = 0;
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_release);
    while (!y.load(std::memory_order_acquire));
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

The intuition behind the dead store elimination optimization is that the only
way another thread could have observed the dead store elimination is if their
code had been racy in the first place: only a ``release``/``acquire`` pair could
have been synchronized with another thread that observed the store (see `this
paper`_ for details). Sequentially consistent accesses are
``acquire``/``release``, the key in this example is having the ``release`` store
come before the ``acquire`` load and synchronize with another thread (which the
loop does by observing changes in ``y``). The second example's load can be
eliminated because there was no synchronization with another thread: even if the
``release`` is followed by an ``acquire`` the compiler is allowed to assume that
the stored value wasn't modified before the subsequent load, and that the load
is therefore redundant. Other optimizations such as global value ordering across
atomics can be applied.

.. _`this paper`: http://www.di.ens.fr/~zappa/readings/pldi13.pdf

Mutex: Safer than Atomics?
==========================

The same optimization potential applies to C++'s ``std::mutex``: locking a mutex
is equivalent to ``acquire`` memory ordering, and unlocking a mutex is
equivalent to ``release`` memory ordering. Using a mutex correctly is slightly
easier because the API is simpler than atomic's API, but it isn't a panacea.

Some current implementations rely on pthread's mutex, which may not expose all
optimization opportunities because the compiler may not know how to handle the
slow-path futex (usually a syscall), or because the implementation is in a
different translation unit. The optimization difficulties can be overcome by
teaching the compiler to treat ``std::mutex`` or pthread specially, or by
`making it practical to implement mutexes in pure C++`_. Optimization across
translation units, such as through link-time optimizations, or optimizations
relying on escape analysis, can also help expose more opportunities.

.. _`making it practical to implement mutexes in pure C++`: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2014/n4195.pdf

Optimizations without Atomics
=============================

Another interesting optimization is to use potentially shared memory locations
(on the stack, heap and globals) as scratch storage, if the compiler can prove
that they are not accessed in other threads concurrently. For example the
following transformation could occur:

.. code::

  // Some code, but no synchronization.
  *p = 1; // Can be on stack, heap or global.

Becomes:

.. code::

  // ...
  *p = RAX; // Spill temporary value.
  // ...
  RAX = *p; // Restore temporary value.
  // ...
  *p = 1;

Since we write to ``*p`` and there is no synchronization operations, other
threads do not read/write ``*p`` without exercising undefined behavior. We can
therefore use it as scratch storage—and thus reduce stack frame size—without
changing the observable behavior of the program. This requires escape analysis:
the compiler must see the full scope of memory location ``p``, or must know that
leaf functions don't capture ``p`` and aren't used concurrently, for this
optimization to be valid.

Architecture and Implementation Specific Optimizations
======================================================

Optimizations can sometimes be made per-architecture, or even per specific
implementation of an architecture. Compilers can usually be told to target
specific architectures, CPUs or attributes using flags such as ``-march``,
``-mcpu``, ``-mattr``.

Spinloops are usually implemented with an ``acquire`` load, which are equivalent
to a ``relaxed`` load followed by an ``acquire`` fence in the loop. On some
architecture implementations it may make sense to hoist the fence outside the
loop, but how and when to do this is architecture specific. In a similar way,
mutexes usually want to be implemented as a spinloop with exponential randomized
backoff followed by a futex. The right implementation of mutexes is highly
platform-dependent.

Instructions can also be implemented in manners that are nominally incorrect for
the architecture in general, but happen to be correct for specific
implementations of the architecture. For example, ``release`` fences should lower to
``dmb ish`` on ARM, but `on Apple's Swift processor`_ they lower to ``dmb
ishst`` instead, which would be incorrect on other ARM processors. Some ARM
processors can go even further and remove all ``dmb`` which aren't system-wide
because their memory model is much stronger than ARM's prescribed model.

.. _`on Apple's Swift processor`: http://lists.cs.uiuc.edu/pipermail/llvm-commits/Week-of-Mon-20130701/thread.html#179911

Some architectures support transactional memory. A compiler can use this
knowledge to make many consecutive atomic writes into a single atomic
transaction, and retry on commit failure. It can also speculate that many reads
and writes aren't accessed concurrently, or that certain locks aren't contended,
and fall back to a slow path, or to smaller transactions, if a commit failure
limit is reached. Such approaches have been implemented using Intel's `RTM and
HLE`_ extensions.

.. _`RTM and HLE`: https://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2579227

Other architectures do dynamic binary translation behind the scenes, and also
use transactional memory. This can lead to further in-hardware optimizations as
well as fairly hard to predict behavior: sometimes races aren't observed because
big transactions commit, and other times they do occur because transactions are
smaller. This certainly makes micro-benchmarking hard, if not impossible.

The same applies for simulators and emulators which often just-in-time translate
the code they're executing—leading to hard-to-predict behavior—and which also
often emulate multi-core systems using cooperative thread switching—leading to
predictable interleaving which is easier to optimize for the simulator.

Volatility
==========

Atomic operations are unsuitable to express that memory locations can be
externally modified. Indeed, ``volatile`` (or ``volatile atomic``) should be
used in these circumstances.

Shared memory isn't explicitly defined by the C++ standard, yet programmers
often use operating system APIs to map the same physical memory location onto
multiple virtual addresses in the same process, or across processes. A
sufficiently advanced compiler, performing some of the optimizations described
above, can seriously harm code which uses shared memory naïvely.

---------
Takeaways
---------

.. TODO: Provide a better link between the paper and the takeaways. Abstractions
         should be mentioned earlier. Sanitizers could be brought up in the
         context of legal semantics of the program. Also discuss where
         optimizing atomics doens't help (we only show where it does), which
         optimizations were tried that fail, and where we can go next.

For the Standards Committee
===========================

Don't assume that these optimizations don't occur, but rather encourage
them. Standardize more common practice that enable to-the-metal
optimizations. Provide more libraries that make it easy to use concurrency and
parallelism and hard to get it wrong.

For Developers
==============

Drop assembly: it can't be optimized as well and is only tuned to the
architectures that existed when you originally wrote the code. File bugs when
performance expectations aren't met by the compiler. Suggest to the standard
committee new idiomatic patterns which enable concurrency and parallelism. Use
the tooling available to you, such as ThreadSanitizer, to find races in your
code.

For Hardware vendors
====================

Showcase your hardware's strengths.

For Compiler Writers
====================

Get back to work, there's so much more to optimize… and so much code to break!
Help users write good code: the compiler should provide diagnostics when it
detects anti-patterns or misuses of atomics.

---------------
Acknowledgement
---------------

Thanks to Robin Morisset, Dmitry Vyukov, Chandler Carruth, Jeffrey Yasskin, Paul
McKenney, Lawrence Crowl and Hans Boehm for their review, corrections and ideas.
