source/N4269.rst, before:

=============================================
D4269 No Sane Compiler Would Optimize Atomics
=============================================

:Author: JF Bastien
:Contact: jfb@google.com
:Date: 2015-03-27

--------
Abstract
--------

False.

Compilers do optimize atomics, memory accesses around atomics, and utilize
architecture-specific knowledge. This paper illustrates a few such
optimizations, and discusses their implications.

--------------------
Sample Optimizations
--------------------

We list optimizations that are either implemented in LLVM, or will be readily
implemented.

Optimizations on Atomics
========================

Atomic themselves can be optimized. A non-contentious example is constant
propagation into atomics, leading to further optimizations such as using the
locked ``inc``/``dec`` instructions instead of locked ``add``/``sub`` when
adding/subtracting ``1`` to an atomic on x86:

.. code:: c++

  std::atomic<int> x, y;
  void inc(int val) {
    x += 1;
    y += val;
  }

.. code:: gas

  _Z3inci:
    lock incl x(%rip)
    lock addl %edi, y(%rip)
    retq

This optimization isn’t traditionally performed when using inline assembly and
showcases the strengths of hoisting abstractions to the language level.

Seqlock would like to use unordered relaxed loads, all of which happen before a
final load which verifies a ticket number. Such accesses don’t exist in the
current memory model. Hans Boehm suggests_ using a relaxed fetch-add of zero,
and shows that on x86 the code can be transformed as follows:

.. _suggests: http://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/2012/HPL-2012-68.pdf

.. code:: c++

  do {
    int r1, r2;
    unsigned seq0, seq1;
    seq0 = seq.load(std::memory_order_acquire);
    r1 = data1.load(std::memory_order_relaxed);
    r2 = data2.load(std::memory_order_relaxed);
    seq1 = seq.fetch_add(0, std::memory_order_release);
  } while (seq0 != seq1 || seq0 & 1);

.. code:: gas

  .LBB0_1:
        movl    seq(%rip), %esi
        movl    data1(%rip), %ecx
        movl    data2(%rip), %eax
        mfence
        movl    seq(%rip), %edi
        movl    %esi, %edx
        andl    $1, %edx
        cmpl    %edi, %esi
        jne     .LBB0_1
        testl   %edx, %edx
        jne     .LBB0_1

This is equivalent to a release fence followed by a relaxed load, and reduces
contention by replacing an instruction requiring exclusive cache line
access. This optimization is currently only known to be correct on x86, is
probably correct for other architectures, and is `currently implemented in
LLVM`_.

.. _`currently implemented in LLVM`: http://reviews.llvm.org/D5091

Traditional compiler optimizations, such as dead store elimination, can be
performed on atomic operations, even sequentially consistent ones. Optimizers
have to be careful to avoid doing so across synchronization points because
another executor can observe or modify memory, which means that the traditional
optimizations have to consider more intervening instructions than they usually
would when considering optimizations to atomic operations. In the case of dead
store elimination it isn’t sufficient to prove that an atomic store
post-dominates and aliases another to eliminate the other store.

A trickier example is fusion of relaxed atomic operations, even when
interleaved:

.. code:: c++

  std::atomic<int> x, y;
  void relaxed() {
    x.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    y.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    x.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    y.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
  }

.. code:: c++

  std::atomic<int> x, y;
  void relaxed() {
    x.fetch_add(2, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    y.fetch_add(2, std::memory_order_relaxed);
  }

We aren’t aware of compilers performing this optimization yet, but `it is being
discussed`_.

.. _`it is being discussed`: http://llvm.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=16477

A compiler can tag all functions on whether they have atomic instructions or
not, and optimize around call sites accordingly. This could even be done for all
virtual overrides when we can enumerate them.

Fences are generated as a consequence of std::atomic_thread_fence as well as, on
some architectures, atomic operations. Fences tend to be expensive, and removing
redundant ones as well as positioning them optimally leads to great performance
gains, while keeping the code correct and simple. This is `currently under
review in LLVM`_.

.. _`currently under review in LLVM`: http://reviews.llvm.org/D5758

Not all compiler optimizations are valid on atomics, this topic is still under
`active research`_.

.. _`active research`: http://www.di.ens.fr/~zappa/readings/c11comp.pdf

Optimizations Around Atomics
============================

Compilers can optimize non-atomic memory accesses before and after atomic
accesses. A somewhat surprising example is that the following code can (`and
is`_!)  transformed as shown.

.. _`and is`: http://reviews.llvm.org/D4845

.. code:: c++

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int dso() {
    x = 0;
    int z = y.load(std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

.. code:: c++

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int dso() {
    // Dead store eliminated.
    int z = y.load(std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

The following code, with a different store/load ordering and using
release/acquire memory ordering, can also be transformed as show (but currently
isn’t).

.. code:: c++

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int rlo() {
    x = 0;
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_release);
    int z = y.load(std::memory_order_acquire);
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

.. code:: c++

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int rlo() {
    // Dead store eliminated.
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_release);
    // Redundant load eliminated.
    x = 1;
    return 0; // Stored value propagated here.
  }

Whereas the following code must (and does!) remain the same:

.. code:: c++

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int no() {
    x = 0;
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_release);
    while (!y.load(std::memory_order_acquire));
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

The intuition behind the dead store elimination optimization is that the only
way another thread could have observed the dead store elimination is if their
code had been racy in the first place: only a release/acquire pair could have
been synchronized with another thread that observed the store (see `this paper`_
for details). Sequentially consistent accesses are acquire/release, the key in
this example is having the release store come before the acquire load and
synchronize with another thread (which the loop does by observing changes in
y). The second example’s load can be eliminated because there was no
synchronization with another thread: even if the release is followed by an
acquire the compiler is allowed to assume that the stored value wasn’t modified
before the subsequent load, and that the load is therefore redundant. Other
optimizations such as global value ordering across atomics can be applied.

.. _`this paper`: http://www.di.ens.fr/~zappa/readings/pldi13.pdf

Mutex: Safer than Atomics?
==========================

The same optimization potential applies to C++’s ``std::mutex``: locking a mutex
is equivalent to acquire memory ordering, and unlocking a mutex is equivalent to
release memory ordering. Using a mutex correctly is slightly easier because the
API is simpler than atomic’s API, but it isn’t a panacea.

Some current implementations rely on pthread’s mutex, which may not expose all
optimization opportunities because the compiler may not know how to handle the
slow-path futex (usually a syscall), or because the implementation is in a
different translation unit. The optimization difficulties can be overcome by
teaching the compiler to tread ``std::mutex`` or pthread specially, or by
`making it possible to implement mutexes in pure C++`_. Optimization across
translation unit, such as through link-time optimizations, can also help expose
more opportunities.

.. _`making it possible to implement mutexes in pure C++`: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2014/n4195.pdf

Optimizations without Atomics
=============================

Another interesting optimization is to use potentially shared memory locations
(on the stack, heap and globals) as scratch storage, if the compiler can prove
that they are not accessed in other threads concurrently. For example the
following transformation could occur:

.. code:: c++

  // Some code, but no synchronization.
  *p = 1; // Can be on stack, heap or global.

.. code:: c++

  // ...
  *p = RAX; // Spill temporary value.
  // ...
  RAX = *p; // Restore temporary value.
  // ...
  *p = 1;

Since we write to ``*p`` and there is no synchronization operations, other
threads do not read/write ``*p`` without exercising undefined behavior. We can
therefore use it as scratch storage—and thus reduce stack frame size—without
changing the observable behavior of the program.

Architecture and Implementation Specific Optimizations
======================================================

Optimizations can sometimes be made per-architecture, or even per specific
implementation of an architecture.

Spinloop are usually implemented with an acquire load, which are equivalent to a
relaxed load followed by an acquire fence in the loop. On some architecture
implementations it may make sense to sink the fence outside the loop, but how
and when to do this is architecture specific. In a similar way, mutexes usually
want to be implemented as a spinloop with exponential randomized backoff
followed by a futex. The right implementation of mutexes is highly
platform-dependent.

Instructions can also be implemented in manners that are nominally incorrect for
the architecture in general, but happen to be correct for specific
implementations of the architecture. For example, release fences should lower to
``dmb ish`` on ARM, but `on Apple’s Swift processor`_ they lower to ``dmb
ishist`` instead, which would be incorrect on other ARM processors. Some ARM
processors can go even further and remove all ``DMB`` which aren’t system-wide
because their memory model is much stronger than ARM’s prescribed model.

.. _`on Apple’s Swift processor`: http://lists.cs.uiuc.edu/pipermail/llvm-commits/Week-of-Mon-20130701/thread.html#179911

Some architectures support transactional memory. A compiler can use this
knowledge to make many consecutive atomic writes into a single atomic
transaction, and retry on commit failure. It can also speculate that many reads
and writes aren’t accessed concurrently and fall back to a slow path, or to
smaller transactions, if a commit failure limit is reached.

Other architectures do dynamic binary translation behind the scenes, and also
use transactional memory. This can lead to further in-hardware optimizations as
well as fairly hard to predict behavior: sometimes races aren’t observed because
big transactions commit, and other times they do occur because transactions are
smaller. This certainly makes micro-benchmarking hard, if not impossible.

The same applies for simulators and emulators which often just-in-time translate
the code they’re executing—leading to hard-to-predict behavior—and which also
often emulate multi-core systems using cooperative thread switching—leading to
predictable interleaving which is easier to optimize for the simulator.

Volatility
==========

Atomic operations are unsuitable to express that memory locations can be
externally modified. Indeed, ``volatile`` (or ``volatile atomic``) should be
used in these circumstances.

Shared memory isn’t explicitly defined by the C++ standard, yet programmers
often use operating system APIs to map the same physical memory location onto
multiple virtual addresses in the same process, or across processes. A
sufficiently advanced compiler, performing some of the optimizations described
above, can seriously harm code which uses shared memory naïvely.

---------
Takeaways
---------

For the Standards Committee
===========================

Don't assume that these optimizations don’t occur, but rather encourage
them. Standardize more common practice that enable to-the-metal
optimizations. Provide more libraries that make it easy to use concurrency and
parallelism and hard to get it wrong.

For Developers
==============

Drop assembly: it can’t be optimized as well and is only tuned to the
architectures that existed when you originally wrote the code. File bugs when
performance expectations aren’t met by the compiler. Suggest to the standard
committee new idiomatic patterns which enable concurrency and parallelism. Use
the tooling available to you, such as ThreadSanitizer, to find races in your
code.

For Hardware vendors
====================

Showcase your hardware’s strengths.

For Compiler Writers
====================

Get back to work, there’s so much more to optimize… and so much code to break!
Help users write good code: the compiler should provide diagnostics when it
detects anti-patterns or misuses of atomics.

---------------
Acknowledgement
---------------

Thanks to Robin Morisset, Dmitry Vyukov, Chandler Carruth and Jeffrey Yasskin
for their review, corrections and ideas.

Commit message:

Address comments by Paul McKenney.

source/N4269.rst, after:

=============================================
D4269 No Sane Compiler Would Optimize Atomics
=============================================

:Author: JF Bastien
:Contact: jfb@google.com
:Date: 2015-03-29
:Revision: 2

--------
Abstract
--------

False.

Compilers do optimize atomics, memory accesses around atomics, and utilize
architecture-specific knowledge. This paper illustrates a few such
optimizations, and discusses their implications.

--------------------
Sample Optimizations
--------------------

We list optimizations that are either implemented in LLVM, or will be readily
implemented.

Optimizations on Atomics
========================

Atomic themselves can be optimized. A non-contentious example is constant
propagation into atomics, leading to further optimizations such as using the
locked ``inc``/``dec`` instructions instead of locked ``add``/``sub`` when
adding/subtracting ``1`` to an atomic on x86:

.. code::

  std::atomic<int> x, y;
  void inc(int val) {
    x += 1;
    y += val;
  }

.. code::

  _Z3inci:
    lock incl x(%rip)
    lock addl %edi, y(%rip)
    retq

This optimization isn’t traditionally performed when using inline assembly and
showcases the strengths of hoisting abstractions to the language level.

Seqlock would like to use unordered relaxed loads, all of which happen before a
final load which verifies a ticket number. Such accesses don’t exist in the
current memory model. Hans Boehm suggests_ using a relaxed fetch-add of zero,
and shows that on x86 the code can be transformed as follows:

.. _suggests: http://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/2012/HPL-2012-68.pdf

.. code::

  int r1, r2;
  unsigned seq0, seq1;
  do {
    seq0 = seq.load(std::memory_order_acquire);
    r1 = data1.load(std::memory_order_relaxed);
    r2 = data2.load(std::memory_order_relaxed);
    seq1 = seq.fetch_add(0, std::memory_order_release);
  } while (seq0 != seq1 || seq0 & 1);

.. code::

  .LBB0_1:
        movl    seq(%rip), %esi
        movl    data1(%rip), %ecx
        movl    data2(%rip), %eax
        mfence
        movl    seq(%rip), %edi
        movl    %esi, %edx
        andl    $1, %edx
        cmpl    %edi, %esi
        jne     .LBB0_1
        testl   %edx, %edx
        jne     .LBB0_1

This is equivalent to a release fence followed by a relaxed load, and reduces
contention by replacing an instruction requiring exclusive cache line
access. This optimization is currently only known to be correct on x86, is
probably correct for other architectures, and is `currently implemented in
LLVM`_.

.. _`currently implemented in LLVM`: http://reviews.llvm.org/D5091

Traditional compiler optimizations, such as dead store elimination, can be
performed on atomic operations, even sequentially consistent ones. Optimizers
have to be careful to avoid doing so across synchronization points because
another executor can observe or modify memory, which means that the traditional
optimizations have to consider more intervening instructions than they usually
would when considering optimizations to atomic operations. In the case of dead
store elimination it isn’t sufficient to prove that an atomic store
post-dominates and aliases another to eliminate the other store.

A trickier example is fusion of relaxed atomic operations, even when
interleaved:

.. code::

  std::atomic<int> x, y;
  void relaxed() {
    x.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    y.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    x.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    y.fetch_add(1, std::memory_order_relaxed);
  }

.. code::

  std::atomic<int> x, y;
  void relaxed() {
    x.fetch_add(2, std::memory_order_relaxed);
    y.fetch_add(2, std::memory_order_relaxed);
  }

We aren’t aware of compilers performing this optimization yet, but `it is being
discussed`_. ``std::atomic_signal_fence`` could be used to prevent this
reordering and fusion.

.. _`it is being discussed`: http://llvm.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=16477

A compiler can tag all functions on whether they have atomic instructions or
not, and optimize around call sites accordingly. This could even be done for all
virtual overrides when we can enumerate them.

Fences are generated as a consequence of ``std::atomic_thread_fence`` as well
as, on some architectures, atomic operations. Fences tend to be expensive, and
removing redundant ones as well as positioning them optimally leads to great
performance gains, while keeping the code correct and simple. This is `currently
under review in LLVM`_.

.. _`currently under review in LLVM`: http://reviews.llvm.org/D5758

Not all compiler optimizations are valid on atomics, this topic is still under
`active research`_.

.. _`active research`: http://www.di.ens.fr/~zappa/readings/c11comp.pdf

Optimizations Around Atomics
============================

Compilers can optimize non-atomic memory accesses before and after atomic
accesses. A somewhat surprising example is that the following code can (`and
is`_!)  transformed as shown.

.. _`and is`: http://reviews.llvm.org/D4845

.. code::

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int dso() {
    x = 0;
    int z = y.load(std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

.. code::

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int dso() {
    // Dead store eliminated.
    int z = y.load(std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_seq_cst);
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

The following code, with a different store/load ordering and using
release/acquire memory ordering, can also be transformed as show (but currently
isn’t).

.. code::

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int rlo() {
    x = 0;
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_release);
    int z = y.load(std::memory_order_acquire);
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

.. code::

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int rlo() {
    // Dead store eliminated.
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_release);
    // Redundant load eliminated.
    x = 1;
    return 0; // Stored value propagated here.
  }

Whereas the following code must (and does!) remain the same:

.. code::

  int x = 0;
  std::atomic<int> y;
  int no() {
    x = 0;
    y.store(0, std::memory_order_release);
    while (!y.load(std::memory_order_acquire));
    x = 1;
    return z;
  }

The intuition behind the dead store elimination optimization is that the only
way another thread could have observed the dead store elimination is if their
code had been racy in the first place: only a release/acquire pair could have
been synchronized with another thread that observed the store (see `this paper`_
for details). Sequentially consistent accesses are acquire/release, the key in
this example is having the release store come before the acquire load and
synchronize with another thread (which the loop does by observing changes in
``y``). The second example’s load can be eliminated because there was no
synchronization with another thread: even if the release is followed by an
acquire the compiler is allowed to assume that the stored value wasn’t modified
before the subsequent load, and that the load is therefore redundant. Other
optimizations such as global value ordering across atomics can be applied.

.. _`this paper`: http://www.di.ens.fr/~zappa/readings/pldi13.pdf

Mutex: Safer than Atomics?
==========================

The same optimization potential applies to C++’s ``std::mutex``: locking a mutex
is equivalent to acquire memory ordering, and unlocking a mutex is equivalent to
release memory ordering. Using a mutex correctly is slightly easier because the
API is simpler than atomic’s API, but it isn’t a panacea.

Some current implementations rely on pthread’s mutex, which may not expose all
optimization opportunities because the compiler may not know how to handle the
slow-path futex (usually a syscall), or because the implementation is in a
different translation unit. The optimization difficulties can be overcome by
teaching the compiler to treat ``std::mutex`` or pthread specially, or by
`making it possible to implement mutexes in pure C++`_. Optimization across
translation units, such as through link-time optimizations, can also help expose
more opportunities.

.. _`making it possible to implement mutexes in pure C++`: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2014/n4195.pdf

Optimizations without Atomics
=============================

Another interesting optimization is to use potentially shared memory locations
(on the stack, heap and globals) as scratch storage, if the compiler can prove
that they are not accessed in other threads concurrently. For example the
following transformation could occur:

.. code::

  // Some code, but no synchronization.
  *p = 1; // Can be on stack, heap or global.

.. code::

  // ...
  *p = RAX; // Spill temporary value.
  // ...
  RAX = *p; // Restore temporary value.
  // ...
  *p = 1;

Since we write to ``*p`` and there is no synchronization operations, other
threads do not read/write ``*p`` without exercising undefined behavior. We can
therefore use it as scratch storage—and thus reduce stack frame size—without
changing the observable behavior of the program.

Architecture and Implementation Specific Optimizations
======================================================

Optimizations can sometimes be made per-architecture, or even per specific
implementation of an architecture.

Spinloop are usually implemented with an acquire load, which are equivalent to a
relaxed load followed by an acquire fence in the loop. On some architecture
implementations it may make sense to hoist the fence outside the loop, but how
and when to do this is architecture specific. In a similar way, mutexes usually
want to be implemented as a spinloop with exponential randomized backoff
followed by a futex. The right implementation of mutexes is highly
platform-dependent.

Instructions can also be implemented in manners that are nominally incorrect for
the architecture in general, but happen to be correct for specific
implementations of the architecture. For example, release fences should lower to
``dmb ish`` on ARM, but `on Apple’s Swift processor`_ they lower to ``dmb
ishist`` instead, which would be incorrect on other ARM processors. Some ARM
processors can go even further and remove all ``DMB`` which aren’t system-wide
because their memory model is much stronger than ARM’s prescribed model.

.. _`on Apple’s Swift processor`: http://lists.cs.uiuc.edu/pipermail/llvm-commits/Week-of-Mon-20130701/thread.html#179911

Some architectures support transactional memory. A compiler can use this
knowledge to make many consecutive atomic writes into a single atomic
transaction, and retry on commit failure. It can also speculate that many reads
and writes aren’t accessed concurrently and fall back to a slow path, or to
smaller transactions, if a commit failure limit is reached.

Other architectures do dynamic binary translation behind the scenes, and also
use transactional memory. This can lead to further in-hardware optimizations as
well as fairly hard to predict behavior: sometimes races aren’t observed because
big transactions commit, and other times they do occur because transactions are
smaller. This certainly makes micro-benchmarking hard, if not impossible.

The same applies for simulators and emulators which often just-in-time translate
the code they’re executing—leading to hard-to-predict behavior—and which also
often emulate multi-core systems using cooperative thread switching—leading to
predictable interleaving which is easier to optimize for the simulator.

Volatility
==========

Atomic operations are unsuitable to express that memory locations can be
externally modified. Indeed, ``volatile`` (or ``volatile atomic``) should be
used in these circumstances.

Shared memory isn’t explicitly defined by the C++ standard, yet programmers
often use operating system APIs to map the same physical memory location onto
multiple virtual addresses in the same process, or across processes. A
sufficiently advanced compiler, performing some of the optimizations described
above, can seriously harm code which uses shared memory naïvely.

---------
Takeaways
---------

For the Standards Committee
===========================

Don't assume that these optimizations don’t occur, but rather encourage
them. Standardize more common practice that enable to-the-metal
optimizations. Provide more libraries that make it easy to use concurrency and
parallelism and hard to get it wrong.

For Developers
==============

Drop assembly: it can’t be optimized as well and is only tuned to the
architectures that existed when you originally wrote the code. File bugs when
performance expectations aren’t met by the compiler. Suggest to the standard
committee new idiomatic patterns which enable concurrency and parallelism. Use
the tooling available to you, such as ThreadSanitizer, to find races in your
code.

For Hardware vendors
====================

Showcase your hardware’s strengths.

For Compiler Writers
====================

Get back to work, there’s so much more to optimize… and so much code to break!
Help users write good code: the compiler should provide diagnostics when it
detects anti-patterns or misuses of atomics.

---------------
Acknowledgement
---------------

Thanks to Robin Morisset, Dmitry Vyukov, Chandler Carruth, Jeffrey Yasskin and
Paul McKenney for their review, corrections and ideas.
