================================================
N4509 `constexpr atomic<T>::is_always_lock_free`
================================================

:Author: Olivier Giroux
:Contact: ogiroux@nvidia.com
:Author: JF Bastien
:Contact: jfb@google.com
:Author: Jeff Snyder
:Contact: jeff-isocpp@caffeinated.me.uk
:Date: 2015-05-05
:URL: https://github.com/jfbastien/papers/blob/master/source/N4509.rst
:Source: https://github.com/jfbastien/papers/blob/master/source/N4509.cc

The current design for ``std::atomic<T>`` affords implementations the critical
freedom to revert to critical sections when hardware support for atomic
operations does not meet the size or semantic requirements for the associated
type ``T``. This:

* Preserves C++ support on aging hardware.
* Supports developers who don't target a specific architecture e.g. with the
  ``-march=xxx`` flag.
* Improves the portability of abstract representations for C++ programs,
  e.g. when compiling C++ code to execute portably within a web browser.

The Standard also ensures that developers can be informed of the
implementation's lock-freedom guarantees, by using the ``is_lock_free()`` member
and free-functions. This is important because programmers may want to select
algorithm implementations, or even select algorithms, based on this
knowledge. Developers are equally likely to do so for correctness and
performance reasons.

**The software design shipped in C++11 and C++14 is, however, somewhat sandbagged.**

There is poor support for static determination of lock-freedom guarantees.

At the present time the Standard has limited support in this domain: the
``ATOMIC_*_LOCK_FREE`` macros that return ``2``, ``1`` or ``0`` if the
corresponding atomic type is *always* lock-free, sometimes lock-free or never
lock-free, respectively. These macros are little more than a consolation prize
because they do not work with an arbitrary type ``T`` (as the C++ native
``std::atomic<T>`` library intends) and they leave adaptation for generic
programming entirely up to the developer.

This leads to the present, counter-intuitive state of the art whereby
non-traditional uses of C++ have better support than high-performance
computing. We aim to make the smallest possible change that improves the
situation for HPC while leaving all other uses untouched.

We propose a ``static constexpr`` complement of ``is_lock_free()`` that is
suitable for use with SFINAE and ``static_assert``:

.. code-block:: c++

  namespace std {
    template <class T> struct atomic {
      static constexpr bool is_always_lock_free = /* implementation-defined */;
      // Omitting all other members for brevity.
    };
  }

The ``static`` data member ``is_always_lock_free`` (*29.6*) is true if the atomic type’s operations are always lock-free, and false otherwise.  The value of is_always_lock_free shall be consistent with the value of the corresponding ATOMIC_…_LOCK_FREE macro, and the return value of the is_lock_free member function for the same type.

i.e. the following should never assert:

.. code-block:: c++

  if (atomic<T>::is_always_lock_free)
    assert(atomic<T>().is_lock_free());

We did not provide the ``atomic_is_always_lock_free`` C-style free functions
(which the ``is_lock_free`` functions have) because these require a
pointer. This makes the free functions significantly less useful as compile-time
``constexpr``.

We show a sample implementation:

.. literalinclude:: N4509.cc
   :language: c++
   :lines: 4-48
